Add directions in using STM32CubeIDE (#79148)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/develop/tools/stm32cubeide.rst

.. _stm32cube_ide:

STM32CubeIDE
############

STM32CubeIDE_ is designed for the STM32 series of chips from STMicroelectronics.

This guide describes the process of setting up, building, and debugging Zephyr
applications using the IDE.  Using the STM32CubeIDE allows you to build and
debug Zephyr applications as if they were created in the IDE using ST's
toolset.

A project must have already been created with Zephyr and west.

> These directions have been validated to work with 1.16.0 of the IDE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These directions have been validated to work with version 1.16.0 of the IDE.
```

> These directions have been validated to work with 1.16.0 of the IDE.

Reviewer: it looks as if you may also want to add on which OS it's been tested/validated? From the looks of it, I am not sure it works on Windows since I am not sure one can launch STM32CubeIDE "in a Zephyr environment"? Or if that's possible, I'm guessing this might require some Windows-specific steps?

These directions have been adapted from a `GitHub discussion <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/discussions/69812#discussioncomment-8770986>`_.

Project Setup
*************

#. Setup a Zephyr workspace such that west is available.  This can be followed

>    in the `Getting Started Guide <https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/getting_started/index.html>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   in the :ref:`getting_started`.
```

   You will need to install the SDK and make sure it is available.

#. Activate your environment.

#. Run STM32CubeIDE from your Zephyr environment.  Example:

   .. code-block::

      $ /opt/st/stm32cubeide_1.16.0/stm32cubeide

#. Open up your already existing project by going to

>    :menuselection:`File->New->STM32 CMake Project`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :menuselection:`File --> New --> STM32 CMake Project`:
```

please fix other menuselection items to use the same type of arrow

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_new_cmake.png

>       :align: center

Reviewer: please make the `image::`s `figure::`s instead, including a caption and an alt description (see https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/contribute/documentation/guidelines.html#images). This will add some breathing room in the text but also help with accessibility

#. Select :menuselection:`Project with existing CMake sources`

#. Select :menuselection:`Next` and browse to where your sources exist.  The
   folder that you will open should have the ``CMakeLists.txt`` and ``prj.conf``
   in it.

> #. Select :menuselection:`Next` and select the MCU that your project is using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Select the MCU that your project is using.
```

>    Press :menuselection:`Finish` and your project should now be available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Press :guilabel:`Finish` and your project should now be available.
```

   However, more actions must still be done in order to configure it properly.

#. Right-click on the newly created project in the workspace, and select

>    :menuselection:`Properties`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :guilabel:`Properties`.
```

> #. Go to the :menuselection:`C/C++ Properties` page and set the Generator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Go to the :guilabel:`C/C++ Build` page and set the Generator
```

>    to ``Ninja``.  In ``Other Options``, specify the target ``BOARD`` in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   to ``Ninja``.  In :guilabel:`Other Options`, specify the target ``BOARD`` in
```

   CMake argument format. If an out-of-tree board is targeted, the ``BOARD_ROOT``
   option must also be set. The resulting settings page should look similar to this:

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_project_properties.png
      :align: center

   These options may or may not be needed depending on if you have an

>    out of tree project or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   out-of-tree project or not.
```

#. Go to the :menuselection:`C/C++ General->Preprocessor Include` page.

>    Select the :menuselection:`GNU C` language, and click on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Select the :guilabel:`GNU C` language, and click on the
```

>    :menuselection:`CDT User Settings Entires` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :menuselection:`CDT User Settings Entries` option.
```

>    :menuselection:`CDT User Settings Entires` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :guilabel:`CDT User Settings Entires` option.
```

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_preprocessor_include.png
      :align: center

>    Press the `Add` button to add an `Include File`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Click :guilabel:`Add` to add an :guilabel:`Include File`
```

   that points to Zephyr's ``autoconf.h``, which is located in
   ``<build dir>/zephyr/include/generated/autoconf.h``. This will ensure
   that STM32CubeIDE picks up Zephyr ``#define`` s.
   The following dialog will be shown.  Fill it in as follows:

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_add_include.png
      :align: center

   Once the include file has been added, your properties page should look
   similar to the following:

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_autoconf_h.png
      :align: center

> #. Click :menuselection:`Apply and Close`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Click :guilabel:`Apply and Close`
```

> #. You may now build the project using the ``Build`` button on the toolbar.
>    The project can be run using the ``Run`` button, as well as debugged
>    using the ``Debug`` button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. You may now build the project using the :guilabel:`Build` button on the toolbar.
   The project can be run using the :guilabel:`Run` button, as well as debugged
   using the :guilabel:`Debug` button.
```

Troubleshooting
***************

> If when configuring you see an error that looks in part like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When configuring your project you see an error that looks similar to:
```

.. code-block::

  Error message: Traceback (most recent call last):

    File "/path/to/zephyr/scripts/list_boards.py", line 11, in <module>
      import pykwalify.core

  ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'pykwalify'

This means that you did not start the IDE in a Zephyr environment.  You must
delete the ``config_default`` build directory and start STM32CubeIDE again,
making sure that you can run ``west`` in the shell that you start STM32CubeIDE

> in.

Reviewer: from.

These directions have been validated to work with 1.16.0 of the IDE.

These directions have been adapted from a `GitHub discussion <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/discussions/69812#discussioncomment-8770986>`_.

Project Setup
*************

#. Setup a Zephyr workspace such that west is available.  This can be followed
   in the `Getting Started Guide <https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/getting_started/index.html>`_.
   You will need to install the SDK and make sure it is available.

#. Activate your environment.

#. Run STM32CubeIDE from your Zephyr environment.  Example:

   .. code-block::

      $ /opt/st/stm32cubeide_1.16.0/stm32cubeide

#. Open up your already existing project by going to
   :menuselection:`File->New->STM32 CMake Project`:

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_new_cmake.png
      :align: center

#. Select :menuselection:`Project with existing CMake sources`

#. Select :menuselection:`Next` and browse to where your sources exist.  The
   folder that you will open should have the ``CMakeLists.txt`` and ``prj.conf``
   in it.

#. Select :menuselection:`Next` and select the MCU that your project is using.

>    Press :menuselection:`Finish` and your project should now be available,
>    however more setup must still be done in order to configure it properly.

Reviewer 2: Nit:
```suggestion
   Press :menuselection:`Finish` and your project should now be available.
   However, more actions must still be done in order to configure it properly.
```

#. Right-click on the newly created project in the workspace, and select
   :menuselection:`Properties`

> #. Go to the :menuselection:`C/C++ Properties` page and set the Generator
>    to be ``Ninja``.  In the ``Other Options`` field, set your BOARD and
>    BOARD_ROOT variables as you would when using west:

Reviewer 2: From testing and the discussion in #69812, it seems that `BOARD_ROOT` is only needed when an out-of-tree board is used. I think it's worth mentioning explicitly, so that in-tree board users don't get confused about what they should set `BOARD_ROOT` to.

Proposal:
```suggestion
#. Go to the :menuselection:`C/C++ Properties` page and set the Generator
   to ``Ninja``.  In ``Other Options``, specify the target ``BOARD`` in
   CMake argument format. If an out-of-tree board is targeted, the ``BOARD_ROOT``
   option must also be set. The resulting settings page should look similar to this:
```

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_project_properties.png
      :align: center

   These options may or may not be needed depending on if you have an
   out of tree project or not.

> #. Go to the :menuselection:`C/C++ General->Preprocessor Include` page.
>    Add an include file that points at the ``autoconf.h`` that Zephyr uses.
>    This will ensure that STM32CubeIDE picks up Zephyr ``#define`` s.

Reviewer 2: Let's be more explicit about this (for example, to make sure we don't add the header for Assembler...)

Proposal:
```suggestion
#. Go to the :menuselection:`C/C++ General->Preprocessor Include` page.
   Select the :menuselection:`GNU C` language, and click on the
   :menuselection:`CDT User Settings Entires` option. Add an `Include File`
   that points to Zephyr's ``autoconf.h``, which is located in
   ``<build dir>/zephyr/include/generated/autoconf.h``. This will ensure
   that STM32CubeIDE picks up Zephyr ``#define`` s.
```

Maybe the image order should be reverted too.

Author: Hmm.. the images are the dialog that you need to use in order to add the include file, while the second one is the 'after' portion.  I'll update the text at least to make it a bit more clear.

Reviewer 2: I see your point. Maybe we should add an additional screenshot of the "before" step in this case (which is why I proposed to reverse image order), something like this:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aa09e4c6-740a-4c08-8a8a-c518b7634ccb)

   .. image:: img/stm32cube_add_include.png

>       :align: center

Reviewer 2: Maybe a note indicating that `config_default` comes from the default build folder name chosen by CubeIDE is worth adding here? If the user changes the build folder, or the default name changes in the future, this could save headaches.
